(tranquil music)
We all talk a big game about coming from the heart
but what does that actually mean?
According to Howard Martin, of the HeartMath Institute,
it means that we're both learning to listen
to the whisper of the heart and learning
to come into a mental, emotional and biological state
of coherence which feels much like peace.
Not only does this coherence change the course of our lives,
it may even change the course of the planet.
Thank you for inviting us up here.
If you can't find coherence in this environment
I don't where you could.
Nice choice.
Thanks.
This is definitely a heartfelt environment.
The land itself is conditioned to that
and we've been here 27 years.
So a lot of love has been put out in this place
for a long time and it makes me feel good
if people want me to show up.
I mean, we're just taking a moment or two
to meditate before we let the camera start rolling.
And as I said, I could just kind of stay there all day
and forget the talk (laughs).
We could just do that instead, right?
There you go.
It might be a little dull for our viewers.
You've done hundreds, if not, thousands of interviews,
nonetheless, we're starting fresh every time
and I wanna know about HeartMath.
And so I would like to go back to why,
would you chose into heart coherence say
versus brain coherence when at that time
there was so much going on with neurofeedback, for example.
And everybody was looking at the coherence of the brain
but you slid in underneath that to go
to something more essential.
Well it came from our own personal experience
before we ever had science or anything to validate
going back now 47 years with myself,
Doc Childre and others all the way back to North Carolina
when we first started out and we were just young people
who were interested in how we improve ourselves,
how do we expand consciousness.
We've read about these things in books
but how do you do that.
And it was Doc really that kept bringing it back
to more of a heart-centric approach,
but what was different about it was that
he wasn't talking about heart
in the same context necessarily
that I'd heard about it before
which is mostly sort of philosophical or spiritual.
But every pragmatic, grounded in this approach to it
of focusing on things like really learn more
about how to regulate our emotions
and how to breakthrough some of the barriers
and things that we had in our lives;
and that place inside ourselves
where we could go past our mediocrity,
where we'd find that hero within
that could really make a difference in how we lived.
And working on things like taking out the ambitions
and all that would be associated with a lot of things
in making it much more of a consideration of the whole
which would be characteristics of the heart.
So our own experience led us to that understanding
because our awareness did change
and we did, I think, become better people.
And certainly when we wanted to do HeartMath
we didn't have a name for it back then,
but basically our task at the time was to take
what we've learned in these 15 years
of really being obscurity.
Without any ambition, having an organization
or to do anything like that, now that we decided to
what have we learned?
And what can we put into writings or books
or training programs or other things--
And how do you give it a scientific basis?
Yeah, here's what we figured out.
We figured out, "Okay, this is a heart-centric approach
"we've taken to this that we wanna share."
If we try to share a heart-centric approach now,
the same way it's been shared before,
we can get a predictable result, right?
Another religion.
Or this heart remains in the confines of spirituality
and philosophy.
So we wanted to use modern tools to give it
the groundedness or empirical understanding
that we felt it needed in the 20th and 21st century.
A bridge builder between understanding and belief
is science.
And in our world today, science carries a heavy weight
and science says there's a lot of belief.
So we began the endeavor of looking at things
to a scientific perspective.
Never with the intention of taking the heart out of heart,
but how do we give it some more understanding
that is gonna give people a greater ability
to believe in something they wanna believe in, I think,
and that they already kind of know intuitively.
How do we take that, I'll use a Doc Childre term,
how do we take that from ska to street?
And for the listeners and viewers today,
Doc Childre is the founder of HeartMath
and my friend now for over 40 years.
But ska to street out of the philosophy,
in the lofty spirituality down to how do we live this,
how does this make a difference in our lives,
in our relationships, in our work environments,
in our health, those kind of things.
And you're looking at another kind of axiom
from the ancient text that's always been at the heart
is the seed of the soul.
And you were just talking about this heroism
that we find in ourselves, for example.
So as you're moving into the understanding,
starting to apply science now to your understanding
of the heart and its impulses and how it can be utilized
for finding that hero within, where does the soul,
the notion of soul fit into it in,
if you do fit it in in the scientific realm?
Well, I think science is trying to understand that.
I think that if you look at the big wide mission
of the HeartMath science and our scientists
is to decode how spirit interfaces with humanness.
And spirit could be an interchangeable word for soul,
authentic self spirit, soul, universal source,
those kind of terms for that.
Something that's larger than our ordinariness,
something that expands into consciousness
that's not our day to day consciousness for the most part.
And so my experience of that would be
it is through your heart that spirit does merge
within our humanness.
It enters me through the heart.
It's transmitted at super high speed into the brain
where it takes on thoughts and impressions
and things like that.
So it's very easy for it to be construed
that it's a brain thing or a mind thing.
And it all works together,
there's no competition going on here.
But to me the entry point is really at the level of heart.
And when I'm in those heart related states,
like in a more loving state or appreciative or compassionate
that's when soul has a chance
to have a shot at speaking to me.
Exactly, you could feel it.
You can feel it and you're paying more attention then.
But the beginning point is what I do
to generate more appreciation or care,
or love or compassion.
That's where it begins.
And then from that point I have greater access to that
that we call soul.
And Leonard Laskow's work years ago
when he and Beverly were working together,
I think out at Berkeley, and they were looking
at the effect of love, of heartfelt intention
on the cells of the body.
At some point, did this kind of biological interface
play into it, was it from the beginning?
How does that play in?
Well in the beginning when we came in the early '90s,
Leonard Laskow was one and he did some work in that area,
but there was very little literature that was written
around the positive emotional states--
And he was working on love on cancer cells,
the effect on cancer cells just for someone
who hasn't already--
Little tiny pieces of research.
The things we've accepted today about emotions impact
on health and importance of positive emotions.
This wasn't in the literature back then.
All it had been on was negative emotions,
anger kills and things like that.
So it's understood that emotion had a negative impact
if it was strong negative emotion
but not much have been done the other way.
We knew that was not true, we knew that there was
a physiological effect in our bodies created by emotion.
Every single thing that we feel
has a biological response to it.
For instance, if we're feeling joy and all of a sudden
we feel anger there's about 1,400 biochemical changes
that go off in our body instantaneously.
Every time there's a big emotional shift
there's like a huge amount of biochemical changes
that occur instantaneously.
We did some studies early on that are still very popular
and interesting.
Around things like the effects
of emotions on an immune system component.
The secretory IgA it's called, body's first line of defense
against invading pathogens.
We did a study years ago that we found a little tiny study
that Dr. McClelland at Harvard had done
where he showed people a Mother Teresa video
and he measured pre and posts
of this immune system component.
And he saw that right after watching the Mother Teresa video
which was an evocative video of her compassion
that the IgA levels went up.
That's as far as he took it.
When our researchers found that they were looking
for these kind of things, right?
They wanted some validation.
So they decided to do the same experiment
but take it further.
So what they did is send test subjects that they brought in
one day and they measured the immune system marker level
and then they asked them to experience five minutes of anger
and then they measured it again.
Well, when they measured it again it actually gone up.
But they tracked it over at the next five hours,
and what happened was an hour after that five-minute episode
of trying to be angry it dropped to 100% below baseline.
And slowly started to climb back up over the next five hours
but never got back to baseline.
A week later they brought the same test subjects back in,
did the measurements again, got a baseline.
They asked them to experience
five minutes of care this time.
Like try to care about something which they did.
Big spike, dropped back to normal an hour later
but not below but back to where it started
and then steadily climbed throughout the rest of the day.
Wasn't that interesting?
Yeah, the question it brings up is how much time
during the course of a day or a week or a month
that we spend in emotions like frustration and anger
and those kind of things versus really being caring
or appreciative about things.
The body's responding to every single thing we feel,
moment to moment, day to day
and emotions are so subtle and they shift
and they flow at such a high speed.
There's definitely an impact on our health.
So that connection is something we have made.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
I'm just saying there are other studies we've done as well
around that but to your earlier question,
what's the biochemical part of this.
Well, heart related emotions have been shown
to produce biochemical changes that are beneficial,
increases in things like DHEA which is engineerically called
the anti-agent or vitality hormone, we did a study on that,
and we can see the effects of these things.
So it comes back to what are we really feeling
at any moment at any given time.
So HeartMath does a lot of things and our researchers
have become a big bridge builder for us.
Underneath all that, what is heart for?
Well to me, one of the most important things it's for
is learning how to better regulate or utilize
this wonderful gift we have of emotion.
In fact I was going to launch into that.
I've always been intrigued with the notion
of is the mind the slave to the emotion
or the emotion the slave to the mind
which precedes the other.
And I often will notice in life that first there is
a notion, for example, or an exposure to,
it doesn't matter if it's something visual,
auditory or what not that the brain initially responds to
or appears to be responding to that then starts
a cascade of emotional reactions to it.
So I mean, the mind, the mind is essentially the builder
or the governor of the experience, yet at the same time,
I don't know if you're aware of this,
but James Barrett, do you know James?
I don't know him personally but I know a little bit
about his work.
He has a HeartMath device, right?
And so we were experimenting
with a brain state technology device
which is just another, one of the more advanced
neurofeedback devices.
And we had a woman who is very expressive emotionally
hooked up to both at the same time.
And then watched what happen as the various impetus
that she would respond to came in.
And this is just a little home experiment, okay,
so you can't put much in it.
But it was always the heart that was responding
to the event just nanoseconds before the brain.
I remember you telling me about that
when we met in Los Angeles about that study
and that little experiment which they did
was pretty interesting.
Well, yeah, I think going back to sort of the original theme
or dialogue in the last few minutes is that, yeah,
I mean emotions are reactions.
We react constantly to all the input that we get in
so we have an emotional response to the input
we get from light.
I think what gets amiss in this is emotions
are also choices.
That's where the mind comes in, exactly.
We can choose emotions and especially we can choose
emotional responses.
"Wait a minute, this is upsetting me
"but I don't have to be upset.
"I can be more balanced in calm place."
Feeling of calm instead.
That's an emotional choice.
And I was in an interview a long time ago
from a major network and the interviewer
was a famous interviewer which we don't wanna name
but when I got through the interview she came up to me
and she said, "You said something in that interview
"that shocked me and I've never thought about it before.
"You said emotions were choices.
"I never thought they were choices.
"I always thought they were only reactions."
And I think a lot of people believe that.
Because we haven't been put to the test
to have to have any mastery over the emotion
because the human being seems to be so addicted
to our fabulous emotional capacities
which are incapacitating to a large extent.
Yeah, that's true.
And I think that one of the highest states of consciousness
we could ever have would be to be able
to feel like we wanna feel when we wanna feel that way.
And that's regulation of our emotions,
utilization of our gift in making choices
that put us in a place to feel what we wanna feel.
That's the highest state of consciousness.
Well, just basically logical linear intelligence
can't get that done.
It takes an intelligence that can embrace the emotions
that works at a faster speed.
And that's what we call here at HeartMath
"Heart Intelligence" comes into play.
People can wonder what a Heart Intelligence is
or what (mumbles).
I take it right to the street.
It's a way that you can regulate your emotions
and in doing so you can create a whole another level
of fulfillment in your life as well as things
like better health and all that.
That's a utility of our intelligence.
Yes, indeed and it's measurable,
and that's what's really neat about it.
I was at some event in Tucson, I think,
one of the IONS events and stopped by the HeartMath booth
back then and got hooked up and did the little thing.
And through our years of meditations and such
it's really wonderful to be able to watch your own self
coming into coherence as you make these choices
that you're talking about.
But not everybody starts at that level, nobody does really.
You've had many years of mastery in this area and practice,
I've had many years of meditation.
But let's talk about someone now who's listening and saying,
"I really need to start having some kind of control
"over my emotions.
"I'm taken down by everybody around me.
"I'm empathic."
Empath seem to be particularly vulnerable.
Let's talk about where their journey with this would begin.
Well, I think the journey, first of all,
is to learn to honor and respect the feelings you have
from the heart more and not just write them off
as sentimental or just an occasional thing.
But to look at heart in the aspect of heart
that people can sort of intuitively sense as important,
as real, as tangible and not as something
that's in the ethers out there but it's the real thing
and being measured physiologically
which is measured through our emWave technology,
for example, which is what you talked about
by being hooked up.
That's the first step, to honor and respect your heart
and the heart intelligence you have there.
Then there are simple techniques:
some of them at HeartMath, the other techniques
that people have, heart's not exclusively ours by any means
so there's things out there people can do.
But you can practice very simple techniques
that learn to help people regulate emotion.
One of the simple ones we have is called
the attitude breathing technique.
Think about what is an attitude?
Sometimes people, Regina, can't really even identify
an emotion but they can identify an attitude,
you know what I mean?
Listen, I woke up with a bad attitude this morning.
What was that?
What was that like?
Well, I felt a little frustrated, I felt a little anxious.
Get on a freeway, you know what attitude is.
I felt a little blue, you know what I mean?
You start naming the emotions
but this little bundle of emotions
creates this thing called bad attitude, right?
So the way the technique works is pretty simple.
The first step is to observe what you're actually feeling.
Now, it's a hard step.
And why would that be?
It would be that way because emotions run undercurrent.
They run fast.
We have the conscious emotions and then
for years the subconscious and emotions
had been talked about.
I have another classification called
the subtlety conscious emotions,
the ones that are always running
but we're just not paying any attention.
We're running through life at a super high speed
and mind stimulation and all that.
We're not paying attention to this river of emotions
flowing under consciousness.
If we slow down just long enough and ask a question,
"What am I feeling right now?"
You just start catching on of the things
that we maybe feeling.
Once you've identified that, if you've identified it
you're feeling something you don't like
then you choose a replacement emotion or attitude for it.
Let's say, "I'm feeling nervous
"because I have to do an interview.
"I need to feel calm instead."
A replacement for what nervous might be.
So let's say in this case I choose calm,
or peace or something like that, I'll stay calm.
And then what I wanna do is focus in the area of my heart,
just bring my attention to that area.
And then I wanna breath naturally, normally,
but a little deeper than I normally would,
and I wanna try to breath the feeling as best I can
of calm, just calm in, calm out.
And just breathe it like that.
Again a sense of just anchoring a little bit,
it's integrating in a little bit so I can start feeling
that feeling shift.
So what I'm doing there is I've slowed down enough
to figure out what I'm feeling.
I've decided that one of the things that I'm feeling
is not what I wanna feel.
I'm choosing what I'd rather feel
and then I'm breathing that feeling in and out
through the area of the heart.
That's a simple technique.
And there are others.
But if we practice these kind of techniques
what happens is we begin to reprogram ourselves.
A lot of the emotional responses we have are just habits
or addictions, those certain things.
And when we start replacing the ones that are negative
for the ones that are positive what happens is
the emotional appetite changes.
I would think so.
It's not so out of control.
You don't wanna feel this way and so it just feels awkward
that you do feel upset, or angry or whatever
and you wanna get back quicker so you move back quicker.
We're all gonna have emotional triggers.
Things are gonna come up for all of us,
anybody who's watching, you, me.
You bet.
All of us.
It's not a matter of whether we're gonna feel
these emotions or not, we are.
I think the real game that we need to play
is how quickly do we return to the feelings and emotions
that we know are accelerating us in consciousness,
that are regenerating us,
that are providing more fulfillment.
Just a distance in time.
I'll give myself as an example.
It's one of my measuring sticks.
Some of the same things that could've upset me
for a week upset me for a day.
Some of the things that used to upset me for a day,
maybe upset me for an hour.
Some of the things that used to upset me for an hour
upset me for a matter of a few seconds.
There's the growth that I'm after.
That's huge.
And again, it's bringing in mental mastery
with emotional mastery.
But you just said another thing a moment ago
and this is something a lot of people ask about
and that is what's the difference between emotions
and feelings.
I think it's mostly definition.
The way I look at it is that emotion is an energy,
it's neutral, it's running through our system all the time.
Where it picks its charge up from
determines what kind of feeling that it is.
And so it's all about perception.
You have river of emotion that's constantly circulating
that's an energy.
And it's a matter of what feeling
does that emotional energy become.
If we're perceiving that, "Hey, life is tough right now,"
then we get those kind of emotions back;
for perceiving that life's really okay
we get a different kind of emotions
or feelings that come back.
The emotional energy converts itself into feelings.
I think it's really--
You think it's more semantics than anything?
I think it is something to a fault,
I interchanged those words and I probably shouldn't
but I think it's really a matter of semantics.
I think a viewer or most people can be quite amiss
in the same thing they kinda get intuitively
or a sense that emotions and feelings.
It's what you're feeling inside, right?
I asked you think because, also a moment ago,
you were talking about we have an intuitive
kind of feeling about it.
And to me there's this other subtle thing
that happens with the heart.
And there is a kind of information that flows through
that becomes really more of a feeling
before it becomes a pattern or picture understanding
that's subtle and non-emotional in nature
and that kind of feeling, it's almost visceral
or uplifting or maybe down draft to it,
really seems to me to be the whisper of the heart.
And that's why I was looking at that differentiation
between subtle feeling and emotion.
Well I think you've described it well.
You painted a beautiful picture of what I call
the voice of the heart.
It is often, it doesn't manifest itself all the time
in these clear cut thoughts or impressions,
it's the feeling that we have inside.
And that's one of the reasons we need to learn
to attune to it more because that voice is softer
than the roar of ambition and survival, right?
So that is going on constantly.
And the voice of the heart is there but it's subtle
and it mostly manifest itself in a different way.
I think that we do contact it.
There's a couple of generic categories
where we do make contact with it, everybody does.
One would be when life has exceeded our expectations.
And we feel just exuberance because life has gone better
than we thought it was gonna go
and it's easy to feel those feelings in.
The other time would be when life is tough.
And when things get to a certain point,
very often we begin to dig a little deeper.
That's when people pull deeper and sad
and they may meditate or pray
or they take that walk in the woods
and walk on the beach or they get in the car
and they drive off into the night, right,
they're trying to figure out something.
They're pulling deeper inside.
And when that happens then the heart intelligence,
the voice of the heart, usually is there
and sort of like, "Hey, we've been waiting for you.
"Here I am, your own best friend,
"your source of self security is here now."
And what happens is things begin to change
in the middle dialogue.
I've had times when I may have said,
"This is really a tough situation and don't know
"how am I gonna get through it."
So there's no logical pattern that's showing up for me
exactly what to do.
But in the next phrase I may hear inside would be,
"But you know I've been through tough things before
"and I'll find a way to get through this."
And a calm comes.
And that's the voice of the heart saying,
"There'll be a way."
You know what I mean, that self security
starts to shine through.
But you have to dig a little deeper to get there.
Now with HeartMath, the systems that we put in place:
the tools, the methods, the technology and all that
are all designed to train us to where we do that
sort of easy and naturally and it's not a big deal,
it's like day we flow through life,
the way we conduct business,
the way we conduct conversations,
the way we approach things.
And that's where you would see those really smooth waves,
for example.
You're talking about the emWave and--
The emWave.
emWave's measuring changes in our heart rhythms,
it's the science behind it.
And heart rhythms are reflective of our emotional state
so you can see changes in the heart rhythm pattern.
And there's a computer-based version that you saw
where you see it on the screen in this handheld device,
this is the emWave portable.
It has little ear sensor you can attach and
the lights will change showing me the quality
of my heart-brain communication.
And those changes will be reflective
of what it is I'm feeling.
And how does that differ from biofeedback?
Biofeedback's all about brain.
It's for brain wave states that were identified
a number of years ago.
Joe Kamaya, who used to be
on our scientific advisory boards,
he's the guy that named this for brain wave states.
Heart rate variability is the science of heart rhythms
and it looks totally at heart, the changes
that are occurring in the heart
in terms of its rhythm and beating patters
and the timing between the heartbeats.
And it's the science that was created in the 1970s
by Australian medical people,
they were trying to find ways to determine
the health of a baby in the womb.
And they could see the changes in the heart rhythms
and so that was its first application,
then it expanded into looking at nervous system dynamics,
and the health of the heart and all of that.
And there was a big field of heart rate variability going on
but very small in the context of cardiovascular health
in medicine, in general.
Rollin McCraty, our chief of research, telling me one time
when we first started doing research
they were looking at EKG signals and things like that,
trying to decode some information there
about heart-brain communication.
And Doc told Rollin, "Don't look at the heartbeat,
"look at the space between the heartbeats."
And Rollin didn't know what that meant,
so he began to look into it and he found out,
"Well there's a science of this.
"Looking at the space between heartbeats
"called heart rate variability now."
And so that's one of the things that our researchers
became experts in.
And they knew that things like movement, speech
all that create changes in the heart rhythm,
it has to be that way, it's supposed to be that way.
The timing is supposed to change for the heart
to do its job as a cardiovascular organ
to pump the blood the way we need to pump.
They didn't know that emotion affected it.
Why?
Because they never looked at it.
And there's one of the pioneers
of heart rate variability research,
I was in dialogue with our researchers and he said,
"Heart rate changes, heart rate variability changes
"are totally involuntary.
"We have no control over them."
Our researchers have said, "You're wrong about that.
"We know absolutely that you do."
When he came here they hooked him up to heart rate,
hooked one of our people up
to heart rate variability equipment
and that person began to change
and modulate this heart rhythms
from the jaggedy regular patterns,
the one you described, those movements.
And he was shocked and he said,
"How you doing that?"
And he said, "I'm changing emotional state.
"I'm shifting from the normal feelings
"into feelings of appreciation, care, love,"
those kind of things and that's causing
that sound wave-like heart rate variability pattern.
As a result of that that particular doctor was responsible
for getting our first published research
in a measure managed dream journal,
the American Journal of Cardiology,
and it was because this particular person
saw something he's never seen before
and he was the expert on heart rate variability
in the world at the time.
But just because they didn't look
and they didn't think about that--
They were looking for something else
and so they're looking at it in different place.
So once we understood that we recognize,
"Wow, this is some serious piece of research here
"because now we can have a way of showing
"the effect of emotion on the body
"like we've never seen before."
And by learning how to change heart rhythms
we can train people to do that, we can change everything.
We can change the physiology,
we change the quality of heart-brain communication
which in turn changes consciousness and awareness
and all these things.
It changes immune system.
All of it.
So we go back to the old phrase that's been around
for a long, long time; the change of heart
changes everything.
And we can take that down now to a scientific level
and show you, "Yes, it does."
And you've done some studies in partnership with
or through Stanford University?
Yeah, we've done some things in Stanford along the way,
we've done a lot of universities--
Because they're all looking for kind of
the mind-body connection, to health now too,
I mean they're taking it seriously, finally.
Yeah, and there's more of it going on.
We were in partnership with a lot of people now.
Very interesting things.
We just entered into a partnership last week
with AOL Huffington Post.
And they're coming out with Arianna Huffington's
big project now is a new web app called GPS for the Soul.
Really?
And it's gonna be a whole lifestyle app.
And the driver underneath that app,
of being in sync or out of sync is gonna be us.
So we're in partnership with them.
So what, we just hold our iPhones now?
Yeah.
Will it interface on some technological level?
Yeah, what happens in this technology
is when you put your finger over the camera,
it picks up the pulse through your finger
and converts it into heart rate variability data.
(mumbles) drive things like whether you're in sync
to make this decision about what you're gonna eat for dinner
tonight or whether you're out of sync
and need to get in sync before you have that conversation
and things like that.
So that's what's coming next.
That's fascinating.
I could just see business meetings of the future.
Get your iPhone out, pull up the app.
Okay, let's get the thumb over it
and see if we're on for this thing.
We're coming out with our own too later this year
and the reason we are, ours will have a sensor
that you plug into the phone and the reason for that
is the ones that use the camera pick up less samples,
so the heart rate variability information
is not as truly scientific.
But with the ear sensor like we'll have
you get true heart rate variability information.
It'll be on our iPhones and that's coming out
later this year.
Oh that is amazing.
So we have university associations,
we have licensees around the world,
we have thousands and thousands of people
that are participating in some way in HeartMath.
I'm always amazed and appreciative.
I mean, this started out with Doc's vision
and a bunch of us in North Carolina
and a bunch of us here in California
that we're doing the best we could
to expand our consciousness.
We never thought we'd write books
or have an institution of any kind
or ever be a speaker or any of that stuff.
Never been interviewed with somebody like you.
These things are not even in consciousness.
We had no idea this could happen but it did,
so all of this is going on today,
HeartMath has grown and grown and grown.
I'm proud of it.
I think our footprint in the world is significant.
Absolutely.
I think we've found some nice things to help people.
I was asked in another interview one time, not long ago,
it's a question I've never been asked before,
I didn't have a standard answer.
The interviewer asked me, "What do you think HeartMath's
"greatest contribution to the world has been so far?"
My answer was, "We've helped validate
"other people's belief systems."
"We helped build that bridge."
For many other things people believe
but didn't have the scientific or empirical understanding
to pull it all together and there's something like 5,000
to 6,000 books in print today
that are siding us in some way.
And for people to be able to have faith
in themselves again it's almost like we need
that bridge of science to give us the permission
to believe in ourselves again.
Exactly.
I like that, it's a good phrase.
What I wanna see happen now as we move forward is,
I think, the science can override
some of the other things about HeartMath.
We get known for the science but not so much
for all the transformational changes
we've created in people's lives
or the tools and the techniques we've created
that we can offer through our training programs
and to things like our HeartMastery program and all that.
All of this sort of gets pushed to the back
when we start looking like we're all about science--
When the app comes out, you bet.
Or all that technology.
And there's so much more to what we've done here.
We were doing a lot of work before we had any of that
in our early days of training programs and schools,
the US Military, all these places.
I mean, I used to go in US military bases and do trainings
and I had no PowerPoint, I had nothing.
I had me standing in front of a room with a flip chart
and was explaining to them about the power
and intelligence of the heart.
So it goes way, way back.
Now we have all these tools and all these things
in the room but it just came from our belief,
we had such a strong believe in what we found in ourselves
and such a strong desire to share it,
not because we were trying to be a big deal
or be somebody but just because it felt like the mission.
We had to do.
I guess the best compliment
you would have down the road
is when people don't even need the technology anymore
because they've learned to master themselves
to the point where you can go in on a feeling level
and you know when you're in that coherence.
That's right, exactly.
And that's what the technology actually ends up
leading people to.
They don't have to walk around
with their emWave on all the time.
But it trains them to understand what that state feels like
and they get verification back in a form of biofeedback,
although biofeedback is a term that relates
to a specific discipline when we use that term;
but it's giving them feedback from their body
where they can actually see the changes
they are making, the things they're doing
to feel differently are actually impacting them
in a physiological way.
And then when that connection happens, boom,
it's like the belief gets so strong.
And then maybe they're not with their emWave,
they don't have the handheld or out in the world somewhere
and they went to a restaurant and they get a terrible meal
and their night starts to like it's spoiled and they go,
"Wait a minute, it don't have to be this way,"
and, boom, they return home quickly
to this feeling inside that they've learned
to train themselves into by using an emWave.
And then you mentioned a moment ago
where everything starts coming together,
and in a minute we're gonna talk about
the Global Coherence Initiative, but before we do that
let's talk just a little bit more about
anybody listening right now thinking,
"I need to somehow interface with this."
What are the ways in which people can interface
with HeartMath, emWave, or programs, or HeartMastery.
The thing I would say for somebody who wants
to learn HeartMath, it's a program we came out with
not too long ago it's called HeartMastery.
And so online interactive learning where we can teach
HeartMath to someone for a whole year
and it's divided into courses,
there's courses over 12 months.
We're teaching things in this, we've never been able
to teach publicly 'cause the timeframes are shorter
in the training program.
Plus, for the last 10 years or so
almost all of our training programs
have been institutionally conducting companies
or medical systems or schools.
Somebody can come see me speak
but usually I'm talking for 90 minutes,
so how much can you teach, right?
And you fly out.
With HeartMastery you've got 12 months of this
and you do it through listening to prerecorded courses
so we do PowerPoints and they're prerecorded.
I give them Deborah Rozman,
give them a woman named (mumbles).
And there's four classes per course and then a bonus class
so you get five of them.
You download your workbooks and your tool cards and all that
so it's all all in one.
And that's really convenient 'cause the learning
can take those things and listen to their class each
week whenever they want to.
We didn't feel that was quite enough
so what we did is we created a lab discussion group call
for every class once a week.
So the class gets together on the phone with the facilitator
very often that's me or one of the other teachers
and we have a discussion about this
and the people discuss it with each other.
So this wonderful community feeling starts to happen.
I finished up a group yesterday
for the advanced course, it's the third course,
and I had that group and work through them once a week
for four weeks and I got attached to these people
and when it came down to the end yesterday
and it was like, they're gonna go now
to the next course, right, and somebody else
is gonna do that and I'm gonna take the next group
that comes in to the advanced course
and I was like emotional about this.
It's like, "Oh my gosh," I felt such heart for these people,
I almost got a little teary.
I don't want to push the hang up button here
you know what I mean?
So it had the components of modernity
so people could learn online,
listening to prerecorded things
but we built the human part into it.
So that we could feel that connection
and create a community of people that are doing this
and it's wonderful.
I wanted it because I wanted to be able to share more
of what HeartMath is and does.
And I didn't wanna do it if they're trying to organize
a workshop business or something anymore.
It doesn't feel like the way to go.
So it took a while to get this done
but I had no idea I was gonna feel this much
from this as I have.
That was the pleasurable, shocking part.
When people get done with it besides the fact
that they have learned how to work with their mind
and their heart and get this HeartMastery in their own lives
is there some extension of that
or do they have some kind of a certificate,
or is there some way they can work with others after that?
There are certifications we have.
We have wonderful people that coach.
For example, the HeartMath 101 Provider Program,
we have one for medical professionals
to learn more about heart rate variability.
There are things like that in the HeartMath system.
Because what I found, and I think it's true,
many of the people that are gonna be attracted
to learning HeartMath are people who care,
they wanna help others, they wanna help the world, right?
And so part of that was the reason we created
the Global Coherence Initiative
which we'll talk about in a little while,
but they wanna share, they wanna have the ability
to feel like they're making a contribution
to the betterment of the lives of others also.
And also people who were in pain
and people who have issues,
I mean even physiological issues.
I mean, it sounds like HeartMath is a great
possible replacement for statins.
Well actually about 20,000 medical professionals
that we know of, this goes into our database,
that use HeartMath.
20,000?
Yeah.
That's really good news.
That one little subset in their database
is 20,000 health professionals
who approach those products or programs from us.
Oh that's fabulous.
So there's a lot going on in healthcare and
it is coming from that care place,
people wanting to do something for others
and we try to facilitate that while we still have
to maintain controls how our materials are used, et cetera.
But one day, a long time ago now,
it's like when the internet got up and running
it was really popular, I googled HeartMath
and I spelled it just like it is one word,
not separated with quotation marks around it
so I come up with HeartMath and pushed the button
and about 250,000 listings came up.
And I went, "Oh my God."
And being a businessman and being in charge
of divisions that are responsible for maintaining
their intellectual property control and all that I went,
"I've lost control."
That was my first thought.
Then the replacement attitude was, "It worked (laughs)."
It's out of control and it worked you know what I mean?
It's like there's a lot of people out there doing it,
and using and finding ways to integrate it in their life
and so it was a heartwarming moment
to see how much it happened.
And you could see it through the eyes of the web.
You could take a look now and see,
"Oh my gosh, look at all these people all over the world
"who are using our work in some way."
And that was amazing.
What a wonderful indication of the way
humanity is going as well.
It's moving in the right direction.
I think part of the shift and the generic term of shift,
it's bringing in a new form of heart intelligence,
the new turn of the spiral that type of intelligence
to create a more heart-centric world, I think.
And I don't mean that the soft and squishy world
we all walk around and some fluffy place
but a world that cooperates better,
a world that has more harmony in it,
a world that has more of a natural ability
to create peace those kind of things.
The type of intelligence that comes from Heart Intelligence
is more high speed and more intuitive
that it allows us to see into these problems
that look unsolvable and come up with effective solutions
for these things so we can get through
some of those tough times and figure out
how we're gonna live prosperously
as a global society on this one hunk of rock.
I mean, we're gonna figure that out
and it's not gonna be easy but we are.
I don't think we're gonna figure it out by going at it
through logical linear based intelligence only,
we have to come in with a new bandwidth
of intelligence capacity to figure this stuff out.
I agree.
And we're gonna do it.
It kind of organically moves us
away from competition.
I mean, not that there isn't healthy competition,
let's do a foot race or whatever
but you know what I'm talking about.
Survival oriented, fear oriented competition.
Big paradigms of the way the world function
are coming apart right now
and they're trying to be replaced by new.
One of the ones you just mentioned is one.
It's a huge paradigm but it's like
competition versus cooperation.
So even some of the struggles we make
like around resources, and around the resources needed
to take care of things are gonna force what, cooperation.
We're not gonna be able to fight our way through it
and take it away from somebody else.
I mean, who knows, maybe some of that could happen
but ultimately for this to work it's gonna have to be
because we learned how to share.
That's an example of cooperation replacing competition.
Another sort of related one would be ambition.
Ambition's not bad, hopes and dreams and all that
but this raw, unbridled, self-centric ambition
of getting what you want and nothing stands in your way
a lot of the world has been build around that
and that's gotten us to a certain point
that it isn't been all bad.
But in today's world when I look at it
I don't see that working like it used to.
No, no, no,
every indicator in the headline news
it's not working too well right now.
It's backfiring.
It's actually creating 180 degree turn on what you wanted
that creates the opposite of that.
And I see that like you said in the news
and I also see it in the lives of individuals
and people that I know and people I observe and all that;
it doesn't work the same way anymore.
A big fundamental paradigm is coming undone.
Absolutely, and you can feel it in your heart
and just in your heart energy.
If you were having a thought right now
about how I got to beat this person out on that.
It is a constricted, horrible, tight-closed feeling
that happens.
I know that's really basic but obviously we're moving away
from that and what you're doing
is contributing greatly, I think.
Basically, Regina, it's also seriously important.
It's the huge blocks of consciousness are changing.
The way I've always seen it is there's this field
of consciousness reflecting back to us,
not just what we think in our minds
but especially what we're actually feeling in our hearts.
And we draw from this consciousness
that creates certain psychologies, right?
Psychologies create this sort of paradigms of what is
and what isn't, what reality is, what's good, what's bad,
what's right, what's wrong,
and certain things like big is better.
Things just sort of embedded in mass consciousness.
And that filters down in the behavior,
how we function, how we operate as human beings
in the systems like government finance education,
medicine, all those kind of things
that are systematic of that and ends up,
"Here's what the world is."
Well, as the field of consciousness begins to change
then those paradigms begin to change,
and the psychology begins to change
and the systems begin to change,
then life on a day to day basis begins to change.
And it feeds itself as we change our lives
it feeds the field of consciousness
so it's a closed loop that's going on all the time
where consciousness is still turned down
we're feeding back the consciousness.
The more heart related choices we make individually,
moment to moment, day to day feeds that field.
We code that field with that information.
The biggest service anybody can do,
and I'll say this to anybody watching right now,
regardless of the projects we do
or whether I'm involved personally
with something like HeartMath is even secondary to this,
it's the moment to moment changes that we make
during the course of our days, in the amount of heart,
and care, and love, and heart related things
that we put out into that field
that is the biggest service of all.
Which takes us directly into Global Coherence.
Yeah.
Okay, let's start.
Launch in, how did you go from HeartMath
into Global Coherence and we'll go from there.
Let me briefly explain coherence.
Coherence is a term getting used a lot and now,
they call it cardiac coherence sometimes or coherence
and it's being used a lot and of course it being
natural progression for it to be used
and it's not a term that has never been used before.
But a lot of that goes back to some of the ways
that we characterized it and now it's becoming
more popular and it's a good thing that it is.
Coherence is a highly ordered state,
it's efficient, it's effective.
Less energy is being wasted.
We know how to measure it and the state that we can measure,
there's a medical term for it called
psychophysiological coherence.
What that means is that this physiological level
all the body systems are synchronizing
to the master rhythm maker in our body
which happens to be the heart.
So respiration, digestion, immune system response,
hormonal balance, brain function, all those things
begin to synchronize to the heart.
And when the heart rhythm is smooth in order
it pulls them in so that they're all working harmoniously,
cooperating not competing.
Reducing friction and resistance.
Exactly.
Highly effective physiological state.
In that state, everything from perceptual feel
to reaction speed time a lot of things
begin to line up and change.
That's why military gets training from us
in coherence building techniques,
that's why Olympic athletes do.
'Cause that coherence state is very perceptive,
very aware, very acutely refined--
Can I just say efficient and,
quick, very responsive.
Correct.
The psychological part, the psycho part
of psychophysiological coherence is the fact that
what triggers the coherence state
is activation of positive emotions.
And then once you get it activated,
then there's a flow of positive emotions
so it's both a cause and an effect.
So you make an effort to appreciate the good things
in your life and you'll become more coherent
as that appreciation grows then it's easier
to be more caring or have a positive outlook on something
because you're in that place, so it feeds it.
So we know how to measure coherence
through the heart rate variability technology,
emWaves, things like that, we can measure that.
Through the training programs we've done
we know how to create it in individuals
and how they can apply it in their lives.
The organizational trainings that we do
we know how that impacts an organization.
Their bottom lines, the retention of their employees,
healthcare cost, all those things and we've done that.
So we've done that for a long time.
So a few years ago we sort of went back
to where we started and in the beginning
we didn't have any of this stuff,
we were about spirit,
about spiritual things and we never really lost that
for sure but we hadn't emphasized it
in the public work that we do.
So we decided where will we be next,
can we do anything to create more Global Coherence?
And so our researchers were approached
by a woman named Dr. Elizabeth Rauscher
who had developed some technology with her husband
a long time ago measuring changes in a energetic field
produced by the earth called the ionosphere.
And she came in and she said they had created this
because they believe that seismic activity
was being preceded by changes in the ionosphere
and they could predict earthquakes and volcanic eruptions
by looking at the ionosphere.
But her husband had died a long time ago
and she didn't do anything with the technology
and didn't know what to do with it exactly;
where it should be placed or where it could go next.
And so she talked to our researchers
and they asked her a question.
They said, "Well that's an interesting application,
"but do you believe that emotion,
"mass human emotion and consciousness,
"has an impact or relationship to the ionosphere?"
And she said she'd always believe that,
she's an astrophysicist, well credentialed,
and NASA scientist and all that
but she'd always believed these things.
So we took that technology, refined it,
took it to some new directions
and began to look at the earth's energetic fields
with the technology and there are two primary ones:
the ionosphere, which I mentioned, and geomagnetic field
which is this field, compass measures.
It's produced by the spinning of the iron core
at the center and the earth producing this field.
These are part of the earth as a living system.
They are actually protective layers around the earth
that if we don't have these fields there's no life here,
they protect us from cosmic radiation,
these different things that are out in space
that would kill off all the life here
if we didn't have protective layers.
So we had a hypothesis that
if we have enough people who are operating
in another level of individual coherence
and we organize them in a way
to create more collective coherence
it is possible that we could measure an effect
of that coherence in the earth's energetic fields.
And the hypothesis was is that mass human emotion
whether that'd be positive or negative
could have a measurable impact
on the earth's energetic fields.
So we created an organization called
Global Coherence Initiative, glcoherence.org,
it's a membership organization, people join for free.
There's about 42, or 3,000 people who joined now
from 85 different countries around the world.
And they become members and there's educational materials
on coherence and coherence building and science and all that
inside the site when you become a member.
And we have times when we bring the community together
to focus on various planetary needs,
things that are going on in society,
using their heart, focus, care and intention
to really create more harmony
and reduce a discord things like that.
And we brought the science into it as another component.
So Global Coherence Initiative is one of the many thousands
that are bringing people together using
the power of intention, the power of prayer,
the power of all these things
to create changes in the world.
We're just doing our part.
I think that the part that we do bring again
that's different or add something
to everything that's going on is the science.
A lot of research has been done and I'm reading them
and seeing more about it now.
We know that these fields have an impact on us.
We see changes that had been tracked for a long time
everything from hospital emissions to terrorist acts
to changes in the stock market and on and on it goes
to changes in the geomagnetic and ionosphere
fields primarily tracked to changes in solar activity,
solar radiation hits the fields, causes change in the field,
traffic accidents, hospital admissions go up, et cetera.
So that's being documented more and more.
So a good 'ole Southern boy logic would say,
"Well if those things are affecting me
"then there's got to be a relationship to it.
"I wonder if there's a two-way conversation going on here.
"Maybe I affect it."
And so the hypothesis is what we do,
especially when we have mass human emotion involved.
So we've seen other indicators and random number generator
experiments done by Dr. Roger Nelson at Princeton
that showed this huge change in this
random number generator data at 9/11, for example.
We have information that we got from the
National Oceanographic and Aeronautic Administration website
showing the day that 9/11 hit there was a huge disruption
in the field that went on days afterwards.
So these are just indicators.
They don't really prove anything but they're interesting.
So what we've done is taken this technology
measuring changes in these fields
and developing what we call sensor sites,
monitoring sites.
And we are placing them around the world
and they're pretty expensive and they take time
to set up, et cetera.
But we have three working ones as of this interview.
One here in Northern California,
right up on the hill here while we're talking.
We have one in the United Kingdom in England,
South of England, we have another one in Saudi Arabia,
and there's one going in soon in New Zealand,
another one in Northern Canada,
and another one in South Africa.
So our scientists know where they want these to be
so that they create a network of them,
and we eventually need 12 to be able to get
a complete picture, ground-based picture
of these earth fields.
First time it's ever been done.
It's been looked at from outer space
but nobody's built a ground-based system
that's looking at these fields.
And so it's something that normally a government
or a big university or something would do
and we're a nonprofit, part of our organization is nonprofit
and nonprofit organization in Northern California
that's doing it.
The goal is to have a system where we can study these things
and do experiments to show that when we come together,
when we are more coherent and we put out positive intention,
positive emotions that we may see an impact in those fields.
We also can look at the seismic activity
just like Dr. Rauscher was looking at;
we can also look at the effect of major planetary events,
let's say we have another big terrorist attack
or natural disasters somewhere;
we may be able to see that there was an effect
in those fields that we can trace back to the fact
that there was an event that created a lot of emotion.
So a lot of experimentation to be done.
Many things are being triggered as you're talking here.
You're talking about the changes in the ionosphere
and you're talking about emotions
and are there ionospheric changes that precede earthquakes?
That's what Dr. Rauscher said.
Up to two weeks prior to the time the earthquake occur
they would begin to see a sensor within 100 miles
of that quake, they began to see changes in the ionosphere.
So if you have an event of some kind
that creates a mass human response, emotionally,
and that's interfacing with the ionospheric energies, right,
resonances?
I mean, can we extrapolate that a large body
of human emotion could then create something
physiological or geologically active such as an earthquake?
Really interesting question.
I've never been asked that one before.
Really good observation on your part.
Well that would be a pretty big leap but maybe.
I think it makes sense if those fields are triggering
those things that we are impacting those fields.
We don't know, I think, the impact that we are having
on what takes place in the earth,
weather patterns and everything else.
What are we doing as human beings, en masse,
that's creating some of the same things?
There's a lot of experimentation that has to be done
and for anyone watching our interview today
I wanna make it clear that one of the ways
that we're approaching this is to make sure
that we do it slowly and carefully
and that we do it step by step
in a very controlled and empirical way.
'Cause these are big implications,
everything you say.
Pseudo science could take it out and eliminate it.
I mean, I have a visible role at HeartMath.
I'm in front of microphones and cameras a lot
and on stages so our researchers don't even tell me,
I think, all they know because--
'Cause you'd put it out before it's finished.
Yeah, I'd put it out before it's finished
and then they're gonna do it on paper or something
and here I am talking about it.
The experimentation will take time.
It's not like we're gonna slap a sensor up in the backyard
and stand around it and pray and see a needle move.
I mean, it's more than that.
We have people on our advisory board
and one of those is Jack Canfield
and he said to me one time,
"I think this could be the greatest
"and most important experiment in the history of the world.
"Because if you prove this you'll prove that
"for thousands of years all of our prayers, meditations
"intentions, all these things that we believed in
"can actually be measured in terms of their impact
"on the physical world itself."
And in reverse, gives us a real imperative
to start changing our own levels of compassion,
care and involvement.
Here's what I'd like to see it go.
And again, a lot of road to walk before it gets here.
What if we learn how to impact those fields in ways
that when those fields impact to society
it was a positive impact.
It wasn't hospital emissions, it was something else.
We could actually imprint those fields,
we encode information that would then feedback
on how we behaved and how we function
as a global society.
That's what I'm after.
That's where I want this to go eventually.
And getting the sensor sites in place
and all that is a part of it.
And more importantly, it's how do we get more people
to operate in another level of coherence,
the baseline of it.
And so we're trying to organize as many people as we can,
get them into program like HeartMastery, et cetera
so that they can learn tools and techniques
and things that are gonna help them
create another level of coherence in themselves.
If we get a lot of people doing that
we think that that can have an impact
that we can create a baseline of coherence
that will lift all boats.
On an intuitive level, I get you're right on
on this Holy Grail that you're going after.
It's a big deal, it's a big project
and I'd like to see that happen.
People ask this all the time, "Where does HeartMath go next?
"You guys have been around 20 years
"you've already done all these stuff.
"Here's where I wanna go."
Where do you wanna go?
This is where I want it to go
and this is exciting for me in my life.
One of the things that I'll say about my life
that I would say to anybody that gets deeper,
in contact with their heart is that what happens
is the ceilings of life go away.
There's no end to this.
I don't feel boxed in.
I don't feel like I've done it already and all that.
I feel like, "Hey, tomorrow's another day
"it's more exciting than ever before."
Anything is possible.
And no telling where this is gonna go.
You're really in connection with the creative flow
at that point.
And days are days and I have lots of things
that I have to do, a lot of responsibilities
and some days are better than other days
and some days I don't feel as inspired as others
and at this part of life I think it's about finding
the balance and the flow and all that
and not getting too excited about the how's
or to identify with the lows and try to find
that middle ground as we go through this transitional era.
And that's certainly true for me in my life.
Just because I've been a good boy and try to follow my heart
doesn't meant I don't have issues.
(mumbles) I have to deal with
so it's all part of the game of life.
Well you're inviting everybody in,
everyone to be part of it, anyone can go to the site
and they can connect with the Global Coherence Initiative
and be part of it if they wish.
God, I wish you the best in getting
those extra sensors going and we'll be very interested
as time goes on to see the implications
of what we just spoke about a moment ago:
this earth and human feedback loop.
That's right.
That's exactly where we're trying to go.
Howard, thank you so much for your time.
My pleasure.
We could talk all day.
As Howard mentioned,
you can learn this coherence technique
via online tools and technology
or you can begin your own journey
into a state of peace and awareness.
However you do it, the planet and our people
need as many of us possible to actively participate
in the energy of coherence and peace.
To connect with the HeartMath Institute,
go to heartmath.org.
Until next time.
Thanks for watching CMN.
(tranquil music)